Ask a bunch of Mainframers what
makes their platform so powerful and
there's a good chance a good number
of them will tell you it's sysplex.
Simply put, sysplex is a way of making
multiple systems work together as a team
and this can be LPARs on one physical box,
or it can be spread out across many.
Before we get into
exactly how it does this.
We first have to define
a couple of basic concepts.
First, there's STP,
the Server Time Protocol.
Systems need to be in exact agreement
about time, like exact agreement and
that kind of makes sense.
If you've got multiple systems writing
to the same file milliseconds apart and
you're trying to figure out which
one got to that piece of data first.
Having your watches synchronized
is kind of important.
Then there's GRS,
the Global Resource Serialization.
This allows for multiple systems to
access the same resources concurrently,
serializing where necessary
to ensure exclusive access.
Without GRS, you have quite a mess.
That's a handy rhyme.
You should remember that in
case you're tested on it later.
XCF, the Cross Coupling Facility,
this manages communication between
applications in a sysplex.
This also lets you be
logged into one system and
issue commands on behalf of
another system in that sysplex.
This right here is what let's
the sysplex communicate as a whole.
Next up, the Coupling Links.
These connect LPARs to processors.
Without these, accessing memory
on different physical systems
would have to run through one of those
LPARs and these allow direct memory access
communications between sysplex memory and
the memory of an attached system.
Finally, there's the CDS,
the Coupled Data Set.
So imagine you've got a bunch of
people working on the same job and
let's just say they're tallying up
the numbers of different colored
candies they're getting from
various bags of candies.
Bags of candies.
Anyway, they're all working
together to get one final result,
which means they're all working
on the same set of data.
Now, in order to coordinate
this operation so
someone doesn't accidentally overwrite
someone else's work, there needs to be
an additional file that keeps track of
who is currently working on a resource.
So everyone knows how to wait their turn.
That's the CDS.
These parts are super important
when you're talking about sysplex,
because without them you've just got
another distributed environment.
Those memory links, the tightly
coupled resources, and of course,
being an absolute lockstep on time
is the only way this will all work.
We talked a little bit earlier about WLM,
the Workload Manager.
It's the component that makes sure that
high priority work gets run quickly and
that all of our targets are met.
WLM makes quite a bit of use of
sysplex to help balance things out.
So if that discussion earlier about
performance tuning on the Mainframe was
interesting to you, sysplex is something
you want to pay close attention to.
Sysplex is at its core, a bunch of z/OS
operating systems working together.
They're able to cooperatively
use hardware, software and
components to achieve a high availability
workload processing environment.
This gets us back to the whole
physical logical discussion.
And when you have systems in a sysplex,
when you're talking about how they're
going to handle the work, you essentially
have one entity that is running the work.
It's the sysplex.
Even though you know that you've got
multiple physical mainframes and
within those multiple logical LPARs,
you'll often hear people just refer
to it all collectively as the sysplex or
just the plex.
Let's talk about those
sysplex configurations.
There are three main ways
you can configure a sysplex.
Now, bit of a riddle, if you've got
a sysplex with only one LPAR in it,
is it really a sysplex?
The answer is yes, and
it's called a monoplex.
Now, you'll often see a monoplex
in testing and staging situations.
But beyond that, it doesn't really
buy you any additional performance or
functionality.
Then there's this concept
of a base sysplex.
In this configuration, every system has
a connection to every other system, and
they all know about each other, and
they all agreed to do work together.
It's almost like they
started a little band.
The most common form of the sysplex
though is the parallel sysplex.
In this configuration,
instead of needing every system
connected to every other system.
We have this concept of
a Coupling Facility.
This is a special type of
LPAR that you bring up, and
typically you have backups of
it on other Mainframes too.
In a parallel sysplex, the Coupling
Facility handles all the complexities and
overhead of those systems
working together.
So you can have up to 32 z/OS images and
up to 32 physical Mainframes.
That would mean one LPAR on each
Mainframe hooked into a 32 way sysplex.
Now, most systems aren't
scaled out that way.
But if you need to, you could do it.
Now, a word about availability.
You might hear people say that a Mainframe
environment hasn't gone down in decades.
But how is that possible unless they're
running on 20 year old hardware and
software.
Well, one of the neat things about being
in a sysplex is you can do what's called
a rolling IPL.
An IPL is just booting up
an operating system, and
a parallel sysplex doesn't require all
the systems in it to be up in order
to function,
just enough to keep it running.
So if I've got 16 LPARS in my sysplex,
we're just saying,
I can bring down four of them,
update the operating systems on them, and
then bring them back up and
put them into the plex.
LPAR has got upgraded and
the Plex stayed up.
I can even do this with physical
systems as long as the,
some of the members are running
elsewhere in other Mainframe.
So let's go back to those 16 LPARs,
say, they're spread out across for
Mainframes, just as an example.
And we want to upgrade one of those
mainframes to a shiny brand new one.
We bring down the four LPARs on that
system that we want to replace,
physically swap it out with a new one.
Cable it up, configure it the way
we want to, power it back on.
IPL will boot up those four
systems on the new hardware,
vary them back into the plex and
we're good to go.
The plex never went down.
That is some pretty amazing stuff and
you can see why so
many people would tell you
it's their favorite feature.
Although it's hard to pick just one,
isn't it?